===================
Equal opportunities
===================

.. include:: common-metadata.rst
:Date: 2009-01-11
:Version: 1


Definitions
-----------

Key Equality Strands
  All of the following:
  
  * ethnicity
    (including race and colour)
  * origin
    (including nationality, citizenship, and language)
  * achievement
    (including Special Educational Needs and gifted and talented status)
  * health
    (including disability)
  * class
    (including social and economic)
  * family
    (including family members and marital status)
  * sex
    (including gender)
  * sexual orientation
  * age
  * faith
    (including organised religion and personal beliefs)
  * political opinion
    (including associations and memberships with political parties or trade unions)

Discrimination
  Use of one or more of
  the *Key Equality Strands*
  in order to affect the legal rights,
  or the right to be treated according to
  all other policies and procedures
  set out for *The Setting*,
  of anyone.


Policy
------

*The Setting* endeavours that *Discrimination* does not exist.


Procedures
----------


Documents
^^^^^^^^^


Single Equality Scheme (SES)
````````````````````````````

Our *Single Equality Scheme* document
is a list of actions or products
that will build equality into the provision of *The Setting*,
with the following attributes:

* Description of finished action
* The *Key Equality Strand*,
  or *Strands*,
  in which the action will implement equality
* The parties to *The Setting*
  for which the action will have a positive impact
* Start date
* Estimated time for completion
* Estimated cost
* Dependencies
  (*i.e.*, do other planned actions need to be completed first?)


Equality Impact Check
`````````````````````

A form with the following questions:

#. Policies and strategy

  #. What are the main aims, purpose and outcomes of the setting and how do these fit in with an equal opportunities framework?
  #. How does the setting am to:
  
    * Promote equality of opportunity?
    * Eliminate discrimination and harassment?
    * Promote good community relations?
    * Promote positive attitudes towards disadvantages children and adults and encourage their participation?
    * Consider more favourable treatment of disadvantaged children and adults?
  
  #. Are there any aspects of the setting's function, including what is provided or access, that could contribute to inequality?
  #. Will the setting's activities have an inpact (positive or negative) upon the lives of people, including members of particular communities and groups? What evidence do you have for this?
  #. Are children and families from particlar communities or groups likely to have different needs, experiences and attitudes in relation to the setting?
  #. Does the setting have an Equality Working Group?
  #. Does the setting have a statement (vision) on equality?
  #. Does the setting have a Single Equality Scheme and action plan?
  #. Are the scheme and plan regularly reviewed and updated every three years?
  #. Does the setting have an up-to-date Equal Opportunities/Equality and Diversity policy?
  #. Is equality and diversity embedded into other policies?
  #. Are policies annually updated?
  #. Is an assessment carried out on policies and procedures to check their impact on equality?

#. Procedures

  #. Does the setting have an ENCO?
  #. Are all vacancies formulated to attract a diverse range of applicants?
  #. Are there clear career progression routes for all staff members?
  #. Does the staff team reflect local diversity and under-representation?
  #. Are individuals frrom under-represented groups on the management team?
  #. Are children's view sought and used on matters relating to their care and education?
  #. Is data collected on diversity (i.e. for funding and inspection purposes) and used effectively to make changes in the setting?
  #. Does promotional literature take into account the needs of families using English as an additional langage and those with commuication and l;iteracy needs?
  #. Are alternative forms of verbal and written communication available such as interpreting and translation services?
  #. Are all staff able to access equality asnd diversity training and do all staff attend?
  #. Does the setting have access to relevant resources to meet the needs of disabled children such as standing frames?
  #. Does the setting have good links with all sections of the local community?
  #. Is the setting aware of the local government strategy on equality?
  #. Is the setting included in local strategy on equality?
  #. Does the setting distribute an annual satisfaction questionnaire to parents?
  #. Does the questionnaire include questions on equality?

#. Products

  #. Are any products generated by the setting checked for equality and inclusiveness?


Access Audit
````````````

A form with the following questions:

#. Approach to the building

  #. If relevant, are there disabled parking facilities?
  #. Are kerbs lowered outside the bilding?
  #. Is the entrance gate wide enough for wheelchair users (e.g. width of double buggy)?
  #. Are there orientation landmarks for visual impairment?
  #. Is the route clearly signed?
  #. Are support rails or resting platforms provided on slopes?
  #. Are all surface coverings even and non-slip?
  #. Are pathways clear of obstructions?
  #. Are all areas adequately lit?
  #. Do steps and handrails accompany ramps?
  #. Are stemps suitable and highlighted for people with visual impairment?
  #. Are resting platforms available and highlighted?
  
#. Entrances

  #. Is the doorbell or entry-phone at a reasonable height for someone seated in a wheelchair?
  #. Is there a level or flush threshold to the building?
  #. Are doors easy to open and doorways wide enough for all users to pass through and clear the door swing?
  #. Are glazed doors marked for safety/visibility and can people either side of the door be seen?
  #. Are door closer mechanisms appropriately adjusted (so as not to close too quickly)?
  #. Is the front door handle/knob at a suitable height/clearly located and easy to use?
  #. Is the entrance clearly signposted and easy to find?
  #. Is the doormat in a good condition?
  #. Is there a fixed or portable induction loop for visitors using hearing aids?  If so, is it fitted and working?
  #. Are all surfaces non-slip and lighting adequate?

#. Inside the building
  
  #. Are all floor surfaces non-slip and travel routes clear?
  #. Does the colour and tonal contrast help distinguish fixtures and fittings from surfaces, walls and floors?
  #. Is there a disabled WC facility no further than one floor away from any room that is used?
  #. Is information on the welcome board presented in a range of formats and accessible to all visitors?
  #. Are the acoustics of the building suitable for adults and children with hearing impairments?
  #. Are handrails available at varying heights in the adult WC and is there at least one rail in the children's WC?
  #. Is the environment free from unnecessary noise?
  #. Are alarm systems supplemented with visual and verbal warnings?
  #. Are all areas in the building wide enough for adults and children using mobility equipment to manoeuvre?
  #. Are fittings fixed without dangerous edges?
  #. Is there control of natural/artificial light to avoid glare/silhouettes and is lighting adequate?
  #. Are door closer mechanisms appropriately adjusted (so as not to close too quickly)?
  #. Are door controls (handles/knobs) at a suitable height/clearly located and easy to use?
  #. Is there a light available to supplement stairs?


Meetings and groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


The SES
```````

Regular meeting
"""""""""""""""

A termly meeting is held including:

* The *Equal Opportunities* *Policy Officer*
* The *Setting Manager*
* Invited members of the *Equal Opportunities* *Working Group*

in order to:

* review the progress of actions in the SES that have begun
* reassess the priority of the actions in the SES, based on the current parties to *The Setting*
* assign resources (time and money) to the highest-priority actions in the updated SES


Ad hoc enrolment
""""""""""""""""

Upon the enrolment of every child,
the guardians are invited to recommend changes to the current SES.
If any changes are recommended,
the *Equal Opportunities* *Policy Officer*
adds them and may call an early `Regular meeting`_.


Equality Impact Check, and Access Audit
```````````````````````````````````````

A biennial completion of
the `Equality Impact Check`_
and
the `Access Audit`_
is done by the *Equal opportunities* *Policy Officer*.
Shortcomings are noted as appropriate in:

* the *Policy Amendment Appendix* to the current policy
* the SES



Specific guidelines for each Key Equality Strand
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Enough of the abstract --
the following gives guidelines on
how equality can be implemented for each of the *Key Equality Strands*.
This is a working document,
and as such is not comprehensive,
but should be useful for consultation.


Ethnicity
`````````

We actively discourage bullying and name calling.
In the event of such activity, the parents of both children are informed immediately and we discuss appropriate action with them.
A member of staff would talk to the child and explain that the behaviour was unkind.
We would take into the account the maturity of the child.
The parent of the child would be told of his inappropriate behaviour and we would work together to remedy the situation.

At the nursery we value and respect all racial origins, religions, cultures and languages.
Each child is valued as an individual, without racial or gender stereotyping.
We endeavour to provide access and facilities for children with special educational needs.
All play equipment is selected to show positive images of all races, cultures and disabilities and to avoid racial or sexist stereotyping.
Our good practice enables children to develop positive attitudes to differences in race, culture, language and gender.



Origin
``````


Achievement
```````````

* setting suitable learning challenges; 
* responding to children’s diverse learning needs; 
* overcoming potential barriers to learning and assessment for individuals and groups of children; 
* providing other curricular opportunities outside the Early Years Foundation Stage to meet the needs of individuals or groups of children.

We achieve educational inclusion by continually reviewing what we do, through asking ourselves these key questions:

* do all our children achieve their best? 
* are there differences in the achievement of different groups of children? 
* what are we doing for those children who we know are not achieving their best? 
* are our actions effective? 
* are we successful in promoting racial harmony and preparing children to live in a diverse society? 

Staff ensure children:

* feel secure and know that their contributions are valued
* appreciate and value the differences they see in others
* take responsibility for their own actions
* participate safely
* are taught in groupings that allow them all to experience success
* use materials that reflect a range of social and cultural backgrounds, without stereotyping
* have a common curriculum experience that allows for a range of different learning styles
* have challenging targets that enable them to succeed
* are encouraged to participate fully, regardless of disabilities or medical needs

We also make ongoing assessments of each child’s progress.
Staff use this information when planning.
It enables them to take into account the abilities of all their children.
When the attainment of a child falls significantly below the expected level, staff enable the child to succeed by planning work that is in line with that child’s individual needs.
Where the attainment of a child significantly exceeds the expected level of attainment, staff use appropriate resources and learning styles, and extend the breadth of work within the area or areas for which the child shows particular aptitude.


Health
``````

Physical disability
"""""""""""""""""""

Some children in our nursery may have disabilities and consequently may need additional resources.
We are committed to providing an environment that allows these children full access to all areas of learning.
All our entrances are wide enough for wheelchair access.
All staff modify learning as appropriate for these children.
For example, they may give additional time to children with disabilities to complete certain activities.
In their planning teachers ensure that they give children with disabilities the opportunity to develop skills in practical aspects of the curriculum.

The *Key Person* ensures that their child's work:

* takes account of their pace of learning and the equipment they use
* takes account of the effort and concentration needed in oral work, or when using, for example, vision aids
* is adapted or offers alternative activities in those areas of learning where children are unable to manipulate tools or equipment, or use certain types of materials
* allows opportunities for them to take part in educational visits and other activities linked to their learning
* includes approaches that allow hearing-impaired children to learn about sound and music, and visually-impaired children to learn about light using visual resources and images
* uses assessment techniques that reflect their individual needs and abilities


Class
`````


Family
``````


Sex
```


Sexual orientation
``````````````````


Age
```


Faith
`````


Political opinion
`````````````````




See also
--------

* The `Special Educational Needs`_ policy
* The `Illnesses and medication`_ policy



Basis
-----

